All right, so welcome to the another
video in which we have
to detect who is the current logged
in user and how we can do that.
So what we could do is be simple.
It's very simple.
We have already studied the concept
of middlewares, right?
The middlewares.
See what I can do is
technically, let's say that
here is your user, right?
This is the user or the client making
a request to your express server.
So these are your different,
different routes.
Let's say this is a route.
Now one thing is what you can
do is like you can write a logic
of getting the current user
here, right, in every route.
For example, let me just
code it, okay, for you.
So let's say async request
and response, correct?
So what you can do is how.
So you are expecting that request
will somehow contain the session id.
Okay, so let's say that user, you
have told the user that hey, in
the headers always give me an header
that is let's say Session ID
as whatever is your session id.
Okay, so this is one thing that
you are saying to the user.
So you can assume that you are going
to get the session ID
of the user in the headers, that is
Request dot headers, okay, as
a key, that is Session id.
Let's say now what you can do is
you can write a logic, correct?
What is the logic?
You have to search
a session by the id.
So first thing first, if there
is no session id, that means
you are not logged in, right?
Return response status
code of unauthorized.
Okay, so what is the unauthorized
status code?
Unauthorized status code 401, right?
So you can just say 401 JSON
and and error that you are
not logged in because you
don't have a session id.
But if you do have a session id, I
want to search in the table, right?
So I'll just make a query.
Await, database.
Okay.
Select okay from which
particular table okay.
From which table that
is sessions table.
Okay, that's nice.
Okay, where you will just say table
equals okay, what that is
table.id is session id nice.
So what you are going
to basically select from here is id,
which is user sessions id.
Nice.
Now if this is not returning
something, if you are not
getting something that is const.
Let's just call it as data.
If there is no data, which basically
means that there is no session,
the session ID is invalid.
Again, you can just say this
particular thing, okay, that if
there is no data, okay, that
means you are not logged in.
This is an invalid session
ID you are sending me.
But if you get it, you want
to get the user information.
So if you know that you have
something known as user id
in the user sessions.user id, right?
So what you can do is you can
basically do a for lookup, right?
You can just say dot join.
Okay, you can just do a dot left
join, you can do a right join.
So let's just do a right join.
Okay, okay.
On what table?
On the users table.
Okay.
On.
Okay, how do you want to join it?
So you have to give the on
where users table.id.
okay, you can just say where equals
this particular thing to what thing?
That is user sessions.user ID.
So this is how you do a join.
Now technically you can get the name
of the user how you can just say
users table.name and you can also
get the email of the current user
that is Users table dot email.
So now this data contains everything.
So you can just say if you got
the data you can just say return
response JSON and you
can just send the data here.
Let's first give it a try
if everything is working.
So let's say this is my
session id, I'll just copy it.
Let's make a new request,
not a websocket request.
I want to make an HTTP get request
on HTTP user.
If I just make a request to this
particular route you can see
it says you are not logged in.
So I can just go into the headers.
Let's create a new header
of which name Session id.
So I can just say session
ID and value and send.
So you can see this is
the current logged in user.
If this was an invalid ID
let's say invalid ID you can
see you are not logged in.
Okay so one, so this is the current
logged in user and nice.
So now you can see that how
you can basically save
the current logged in user.
Now let's say I have one more route
that is a private route.
Okay, so let's say
I have a update route.
Let's say user wants
to update his some information.
So it's a patch request.
Okay, let's say router.patch/async
request and response.
And what you want to do is you want
to basically update something
from the current logged in user.
So let's say he wants
to update his name.
So request body.
So let's say name is
something he wants to update.
Now here is a problem right as
Soon as you update the name you
want to see if the current
logged in user is who so you
have to repeat this code, is
that correct?
So that means if you have a lot
of routes, which has some
private information, you want
the information about the user,
you have to repeat this piece
of code, which is not a correct
thing.
So in Express, what you can
do is you can basically create
a middleware, a middleware,
okay, which always runs.
This middleware is responsible for
fetching the session and keeping it
in the data of the session and then
forward the request to the route.
Got it.
Now so what we can do is this
middleware can do the database
operation and on the request it
can create a new object named as
user, which is basically the
current logged in user, and then
forward the request to the
appropriate handler.
That means if I go here,
what I could basically do is I
can create a middleware app.
Use an async function.
Okay, so this basically
has request response.
And next, see what I
could basically do here.
Okay, I'll just copy paste the code
first, try to take the session id.
If there is no session id,
that means there is no user.
Just call the next function.
Right?
Because next function can
decide whether it wants
to process that request or not.
So I can just say a return.
But if there is a session id,
what do you want to do?
You want to query that session.
So I can just do a copy
of this particular code, right?
And paste it here.
Now here is a problem.
These things need to be imported.
So don't forget
to import these things.
Okay, that is db.
So this is just one level up, the db.
And you also want to import
this thing and this thing.
Copy, paste and this thing.
Nice.
Okay, so that means you got the data.
Now what you can do is if there
is no data, if there is no data,
okay, so that means,
where is this ending somewhat here.
If there is no data again, you
can just call the next function
without doing anything much.
But if you got the data, you
can just say request dot.
You can add a new property, user,
which is basically
this particular data.
Okay?
Request user as data and then
call the next function.
So technically what is happening
here is if the data is
there, the request will have
a new property, that is user.
So that means if the user is actually
logged in, request user will
be added to the current request.
That means now I don't have
to do all this stuff.
Okay, What I can just do is
to get the current logged
in user, I can just say const
user equals to request user.
That's it.
If there is no user, I
want to return this.
So that means this
logic has been removed.
I don't want to query anything.
Right.
And then if the user is
there, you just return this.
That's it.
Because you have moved that
particular logic to the middleware,
let's make sure if
everything is working.
Yes, everything is working fine.
Got it.
Now.
Now, if you want to update something,
first, you can basically check if
that particular user exists or not.
That's it.
But if that user exists,
of course you want the user id.
So here is a problem.
So this is basically your session ID.
This is basically your
session ID, not the user ID.
So you might want to say where
table.session ID and ID should be.
Basically, user table ID.
Okay, so user table.it nice.
So now what you can do is you can
just say to update something.
I can just say await DB dot update.
Okay, which table do
you want to update?
I want to update the users table dot.
Okay, set.
What do you want to set?
I want to set the name.
Okay, but where do you
want to set the name?
Okay, you can just say aware, where.
Now this is very important.
Equals user table.id
is actually equals to request user.
That is user.id.
so this is basically
request users current id.
That's it.
So you update it and then you
can just say return response.JSON
saying status success.
That's it.
Okay, so this is taking care
of the, authentication
using the middleware function.
So now if I go back and I'm trying
to make a get request first,
you can see that, yes, I am
getting everything that is nice.
Now if I do a patch request,
okay, on the body raw JSON.
Okay, So I can just
update my name, right?
So from piyushkar, let's
make it as piyush.
Send success.
Now if I make a get request
and send, you can see my name
is now updated, as piyush.
So that means even in the database,
okay, if I go into
the users, it is now piyush.
Okay, let's make it Piyush.
Garg again PiyushGarg.
Sorry, it's a patch send success.
If you try to now get, you
are getting piyushkarg.
So if I do a refresh.
Yeah, you can see it's now piyushkar.
So this is how it is updating.
Got it.
Now, so this middleware is basically
taking care of the authentication.
So now this is basically what this
is session based authentication.
The problem with the session
based authentication is
this, that on every request
you are making a database call.
Do you see that?
On every request you are
making a database call.
So just imagine if user is
repetitively making request, you
are actually doing a database
operation on every request
to exchange the session ID
with the user's information.
So that means this particular
middleware which is always running,
where is that middleware?
Yeah, this is a very
expensive operation.
For every request you are making
a database call, which is
causing multiple problems.
Problem number one, you are
making a lot of calls
to the database, which makes
the database overwhelmed.
Second problem is you are
adding a latency, right?
Because it's a database operation.
In reality your database is running
on a different server.
So you are basically going
to a database, getting
the session information and then
processing the request.
So that means there is always
an added latency, added some
processing time to every request.
Your every request will be slow
because request came, you have first
do the session thing
in the database and then you have
to again do database operation
for some other thing.
So that means this particular thing
is making database call on every
request, thus making every request
slow and overwhelming the database.
But it is more secure, right?
Because every time you are
making a database call.
So what I could ideally do is
now if I go back and I just
delete the session, see, if I
go into the sessions and I
delete this particular entry,
as soon as I delete now, you're
logged out.
See.
So that means banking systems where
the security is important,
they use this session based thing.
So with this particular
approach you can even detect
where all he is logged in.
You can invoke revoke a session.
So technically you can do a lot
of things here, right?
So this is basically your
session based authentication.
Now in the next particular video
we are going to see how we
can make a stateless authentication
using JSON web tokens.
And we can reduce this overhead.
This always making an API call or
making a query to the database
more faster by not making it.
So we will see how JSON web token
solves this particular problem.